---
date: 2025-01-30T21:36:57-05:00
title: "It's Not Nostalgia, Exactly"
blurb: "Articulating the feelings I have whenever I return to Toronto is harder than expected"
mp-syndicate-to:
- mastodon
tags:
- toronto
---

I have spent most of my life in Montreal but there was a decent sized chunk
in the middle, spanning high school and university, when I lived in Toronto.

I still visit Toronto not infrequently.  I have a soft spot for it; at the
very least, I don't harbour quite the same level visceral hatred a lot of
people seem to lob at the city.

But I haven't lived there for over 20 years.  Obviously, a lot has changed
in that time.  I'm not sure I could live there now.  I mean, I guess I
*could* but my life would look very different.  The place is so huge, and
the housing so expensive, that I'm not sure it would be a good trade.

Going back, even just to visit, feels strange.  I don't think it's
nostalgia, exactly.  My old haunts, such as they were, are long gone, so it
never feels like I'm going home.  I liked my time there well enough, and I
have a tendency to jump to its defence when people start getting snarky
about it, but I'm not like Woody Allen in Manhattan, "romanticizing it all
out of proportion."

Actually, I think I know what it is.  It's not nostalgia, a longing for a
past that may or may not have existed.  It's more like irrational
indignation that the city had the audacity to move on without me.

I mean, how narcissistic can you get, right?  To believe, in your heart of
hearts, that a city should stop moving when you're not there?  I never
realized I had such a big ego.

Maybe the right thing to do is just acknowledge that the Toronto where I
spent a good portion of my formative years just doesn't exist anymore.  You
can never go home again, as they say.  Maybe I should just lean into the
tourist thing when I visit.  There is, after all, a lot to see and do.

And maybe it would help to finally internalize the notion, so abstractly
obvious but still sometimes a tough pill to swallow, that the city in which
you once lived doesn't know you exist.  It's a freeing idea, all things
considered.
