---
blurb: Covid musings
date: '2020-10-25T02:44:23.000Z'
modified: '2020-10-25T02:44:23.000Z'
tags:
  - covid-19
title: Things I Learned In Lockdown
---

While it's perhaps inaccurate to call the current Covid-19 crisis
"unprecedented" (given that the [Spanish Flu outbreak][1] in 1918 led to
many of the same measures), I think it's reasonable to say that it's
unprecedented in my lifetime - and I'm not exactly young.

Accordingly, in these heady times, I don't think it's uncommon to discover a
thing or two about yourself.  Hell, introspection is almost inevitable,
given the circumstances.

In that vein, this is my "Things I Learned In Lockdown" post.  There are
many like it, but this one is mine.

One thing I learned is that I'm not *quite* the introvert that I thought I
was.  I mean, don't get me wrong - I'm *kind of* an introvert.  I tend to be
subdued at parties and drained afterwards, and if I have a choice between a
small gathering and a large one, I'll choose the small one.  But I see
people in my social feeds who are able to effortlessly go for weeks at a
time without interacting with another soul and I've come to the stark
realization that I am not one of them.

It's not even that I particularly miss talking to other people.  It's more
basic than that; I miss just being *around* other people.  I miss being
*ambiently* social.  I miss sitting in a coffee shop and being surrounded by
conversation and bustle.

It's like, I never fully realized just how much of my need for social
interaction and scenic variety was fulfilled by simply taking the subway to
and from work every day.

And I've learned that while I can be productive working from home, I don't
enjoy it as much as working in the office.  In the past I would sometimes
chalk up my distaste for remote work to a consistently flaky VPN but my
current setup more or less takes that particular issue out of the equation
and the result is still the same.  This experiment in enforced isolation
just confirms to me that I don't particularly like working form home.

To be fair, this is not exactly a controlled experiment.  It's possible, for
example, that I'd find remote work more agreeable if I could *also* visit
restaurants and bars and friends without any restrictions.  While I'm sure
there's some truth to this I think, if I'm honest with myself, that it would
simply make working from home somewhat more *tolerable* but not
*preferable*.

One aspect of remote work that I didn't foresee was just how out of touch I
would become with everyone.  Going into the office every day means
interacting with people who are not necessarily on my immediate team.  It
means having a coffee or eating lunch with people from another floor or
department.  When you work from home, that sort of random socializing
doesn't occur as easily.  I would sometimes find myself sending messages to
people I hadn't heard from in a while just to see if they were still around.

I've started to hear rumblings that some companies are using the current
crisis as an opportunity to become permanently remote to save on real estate
costs, and while I do understand this inclination, especially in high-cost
areas like San Francisco, I hope it doesn't spread to Montreal.

It would be nice to see my co-workers again on a regular basis.  It would be
nice to have meetings in rooms with actual whiteboards.  It would be nice to
feel activity around me as I drink my coffee and eat my lunch.

Anyway, none of this goes away until we get a vaccine, and that's not going
to happen until some time next year, at the earliest.  In the meantime, to
paraphrase Joe Biden, it's going to be a long, dark winter.

I suppose we're lucky, in a way.  Can you imagine going through this in
1918?  No TV, no radio, barely any telephones.  People were literally all
you had, except now you didn't.  And people got past it, so I guess we
should take solace in that.

I think I need to start another puzzle.

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spanish_flu
