---
date: 2013-11-20T08:53:49.000Z
modified: 2015-05-16T05:53:02.140Z
tags:
  - society
  - quebec
  - religion
title: Charter Ramblings
---

Many years ago I read a book called [The Diamond Age][1], by Neal
Stephenson.  The backdrop against which the story occurs is a relatively
near future society where traditional notions of country and state have been
largely supplanted by notions of "phyles" - tribes or groups having similar
ethnic or cultural characteristics. One of the main characters, a Mr. John
Hackworth, belongs to the Neo-Victorian phyle who, like their namesake, are
a somewhat prudish lot who follow a rigid and absolute moral code.

The book is good, but one scene in particular has stayed with me. Hackworth
is having a conversation with a few of his fellow Neo-Victorians. One of
them asks him what he thinks about "hypocrisy". Hackworth doesn't quite know
what to make of this question but eventually concedes, somewhat
half-heartedly, that it's a "vice" - something that should be avoided. This
eventually leads to a discussion about *our* time (the past, from their
perspective) which, according to the Neo-Victorians, is characterized by a
rampant moral and cultural relativism. It's a time where all philosophies,
no matter how depraved, have equal value. In such a world, it's obviously
unacceptable to criticize another person's beliefs because doing so would
require some sort of objective standard of morality which, in their view,
our age sorely lacks.

They go on to note that "hypocrite" was about the only moral criticism you
could level at another person, because in a world where it's taboo to attack
the contents of another's beliefs, the one thing you *can* do is attack the
consistency with which they're applied.

## The Focus on Hypocrisy

If you live in Canada, and haven't been under a rock, you've at least heard
of the [Charter Of Quebec Values][2]. Among other things, it's an attempt to
ban civil servants, including teachers, doctors, nurses, and daycare
workers, from wearing what is deemed to be "ostentatious" religious
garb. Hijabs, turbans, kippahs and large crucifixes are all targets.

Notably, the Charter stops short of removing what is probably the most
ostentatious religious symbol of them all: the large crucifix in the Quebec
National Assembly, claiming that it's a cultural rather than religious
symbol. The crucifix on top of Mount Royal apparently gets to stay as well.

The blatant hypocrisy at work here is...distasteful. Other people use more
colourful words to describe it. But I always think back to that scene in The
Diamond Age whenever someone denounces the Charter as being hypocritical -
and just stops there, as if nothing more needed to be said.  Because while
it's undoubtedly true that the Charter is laughingly inconsistent, I just
don't think that is, in and of itself, particularly relevant.

You know how people say that Hitler was voted into power?  That the German
people - well, minus the Jews, I guess - explicitly voted for Nazism,
anti-semitism and brutality, and that this is a good reason to be leary of
unchecked democratic power?  How are you supposed to react when someone
hears that and responds with something like:

> Yeah, but I hear Hitler actually rigged the election. He didn't
> actually win.

I get irritated whenever someone says that because this is basically an
attempt to change the subject. The real subject is the dangers of unchecked
democratic power, not the actual election results per se.  Ultimately, even
if the election was rigged, the question you need to ask yourself is whether
it matters.  Would things be different for you if you were confronted with
incontrovertible evidence that Hitler was, in fact, legitimately voted into
power?

(I'm aware of [Godwin's Law][3]. I am not, however, comparing anyone to
Nazis; I'm merely using their rise to power to illustrate a point)

Now ask yourself this: what if the Charter *were* consistent? What if the PQ
decided to take down the cross in the National Assembly? What if they
decided to remove the crucifix on top of Mount Royal? What if they decided
to rename all the streets with the word "Saint" in them to something
less...Catholic? In short, what if they managed to convince you that the
Charter really was about secularism, and not about drawing an arbitrary line
in the sand between "us" and "them". Would you support it?  Because that, in
my opinion, is a much more interesting question. And - I'm just being honest
here - I'm not 100% sure what my answer would be.

Here's the thing: my reaction to the Charter wasn't *quite* the knee-jerk
revulsion shared by most people I know. I'm actually extremely sympathetic
to its *stated* goals.  I'm an atheist. I believe very strongly in the
separation of Church and State.  I don't think religion has any place in the
legislative machinery of the State.  I am for the removal of both the
crucifix in the National Assembly and the one on top of Mount Royal.  I am
for the elimination of group prayer from council meetings and public
schools.  I am, in short, a secularist - a *consistent* one, I like to think.

I also have libertarian tendencies. My guiding principles when it comes to
dealing with other people really boil down to "live and let live" and "don't
be a dick". So that basically means I'm pro-gay-marriage, pro-choice, and
pro-free-speech. I'm also an advocate of letting people wear whatever the
hell they want to wear and I've blogged before about my disgust with the
[banning of the niqab in France][4]. Everyone has the absolute right to
dress as they please, and it is most definitely not anyone's job to adjust
to anyone else's expectations.

But, that being said, this doesn't mean that you can wear what you like and
expect there to be no consequences. Choices have consequences, including
what you choose to wear.

This is true for everyone. It is my firm and absolute right to wear jogging
pants to a job interview and, I might add, doing so has no bearing
whatsoever on whether I can perform the duties of said job to the
satisfaction of my employer. But I wouldn't bet on being hired, *and no one
would argue the point*.

Or, to follow the analogy a little further, I have a right to wear a Coke
t-shirt to a job interview with PepsiCo. Again, wearing a Coke t-shirt, in
theory, has no bearing on whether I can perform the job in question. But
it's probably fair to say that wearing a Coke t-shirt runs counter to the
values espoused by PepsiCo.  I probably wouldn't get hired, *and again no
one would argue the point*.

So, yes, you have the absolute right to wear a hijab, or a turban, or a big,
shiny crucifix but understand that if you do, you will necessarily be
closing some doors to yourself. You'll probably have a hard time making
friends if you insist on covering your face. You probably won't ever be a
mainstream swimsuit model. If you had inclinations towards acting, you'd
probably be restricted to a very specific kind of role. And if you had
aspirations towards civil service then, well, you're probably going to have
rough time of it if the government in question lists a militant kind of
secularism as one of its core values. Or, to put it another way, I don't
think it's *completely* insane, on the face of it, for a militantly secular
government to expect its employees to dress the part.

And, to be clear, I think a militantly secular government is a *good*
thing. Let me reiterate, for the record: I approve wholeheartedly of the
separation of Church and State.  I approve of [Laicite][7]. So, with that in
mind, let me explain why everything I just said is completely wrong.

## Why Everything I Just Said Is Wrong

Well, okay, not *completely* wrong. I stand by all of it, as far as it
goes. But there are some underlying assumptions running through all those
thoughts that, when all is said and done, are of questionable validity.

For one thing, alot of people assume that the Charter is actually about the
separation of Church and State. I've had this talk with several pro-Charter
people. The Charter is strictly about promoting secularism, so the story
goes, and anyone who is anti-Charter must be pro-female-circumcision or
something.

This, too, is wrong.

I mean, when did a "lack of secularism" in the government become an actual
problem? Have there been documented instances of turban or hijab wearing
civil servants who have performed their governmental duties in a less than
secular manner? I doubt it. So this seems suspicious from the get-go.

The suspicion mounts with the refusal to remove the crucifix in the National
Assembly. It seems to me that if your *true* goal was the promotion of
secularism, then a giant crucifix in the middle of the very room where you
*pass all of your laws*, installed there by none other than Quebec's very
own [Catholic dictator][8], would be the *very first thing on the chopping
block*.

But once again my mind goes back to The Diamond Age. Is this a case of
harping on the hypocrisy of the Charter without really caring about its the
actual contents? This is something that I actually worry about, but I think
I've come to the conclusion that we're talking about two different
things. Let's be clear: this isn't hypocrisy in The Diamond Age sense. This
isn't an accidental lack of consistency in an otherwise well-meaning
Charter. The hypocrisy, in this case, reveals an entirely different mindset
than my own.

The people who drafted the Charter do not believe in the same things I do. I
value freedom of choice and living with the consequences of those choices.
I value a secular government. But when you hear [famous Quebecers][9] coming
out in favour of the Charter with lines like "I would be afraid to be
treated by a Muslim doctor wearing a veil" and "veiled women are being
manipulated", you begin to realize that, as it currently stands, the Charter
has *nothing at all* to do with secularism and everything to do with
dividing Quebec society into an "us" part and a "them" part. It's an attempt
to turn a minority government into a majority government by pandering to a
xenophobic element in Quebec society. As a political strategy, it's actually
pretty smart. And it may work.

The Charter bans religious garb for civil servants in the name of the
separation of Church and State. But if that's not *really* your goal, and
you're daring enough to call a crucifix (and only a crucifix) a "cultural
artifact", then what's to stop you from banning hijabs and turbans in public
as well?  For reason I've already stated, that kind of thing would go
*completely* against my beliefs, but I actually know at least one or two
pro-Charter people for whom it wouldn't. And if you think it's unlikely to
happen, please remember that this is already a [reality in France][4].

So I guess, at the end of the day, hypocrisy *does* matter. Because
sometimes it's the inconsistencies that tell you whether a person is truly a
philosophical ally, or whether his or her beliefs just happen to share, by
sheer coincidence, something in common with yours.

## Wallowing In Christian Privilege

One term that gets bandied around feminist blogs is "male privilege". If you
muscle past the somewhat natural urge (if you're male) to be defensive about
it, you begin to see it [*everywhere*][5]. The trick to dealing with it is
to realize that "male privilege" isn't something that you "did" but rather
something that you simply "have". It's not something that's "your fault" in
the sense of being blameworthy. Once you realize that, it's easier to
confront. Male privilege is at work, for example, when a man can be
unimpressive at math without it being a [stigma against his entire sex][6].
It's at work when he can be unattractive and not have it be a major factor
in his career prospects.

I believe that there's something called "Christian privilege", and that it's
at the very heart of the Charter. It's at work when a Christian is granted
the right to regard the crucifix as a purely cultural artifact, completely
devoid of any spiritual significance. It's at work when eating fish on
Fridays, or putting up a Christmas tree, are considered nothing more than
harmless, non-denominational traditions. It's at work when people try to
peddle Christian symbols as universal representations of liberal, Western
values, like freedom of speech and the pursuit of happiness. It's at work
when I can have Christmas off with my family without anyone thinking that
I'm homophobic, or that that I'm pro-life, or that I'm a Creationist.  It's
at work when a woman can wear a cross without anyone assuming that there's
someone lurking in the background making her wear it

These are privileges that are notably *not* granted to, say, Muslims. A
woman who wears a hijab is doing so for religious reasons - or she's being
forced, also for religious reasons. She is most definitely not doing it for
cultural reasons, or because she happens to think it looks nice on her, or
because she's having a bad hair day or because she simply doesn't think
about it. And Allah help her if she observes Ramadan *as well*...

To be sure, hijabs and burqas can be used as tools of oppression. The
mistake people make is conflating the oppression with the specific items of
clothing. Being against *oppression* is good; being against particular items
of *clothing* is not.

It's also not particularly hard to find examples of Christian symbols being
used as tools of oppression. In no particular order, off the top of my head,
we have:

* The Inquisition
* The Crusades
* The Salem Witch Trials
* Any of the myriad stories of Catholic child abuse

I can only imagine what kind of examples someone whose knowledge of history
*isn't* paltry could come up with.

And yet, today, people, in general, would be hard pressed to *equate* a
crucifix with any these things. And I completely agree - a crucifix doesn't
*have* to mean something bad. But if we're going to go down that road, it's
only fair to offer the same courtesy to everyone.

Quebecers are amongst the most secular minded people in this country, and
yet I can only assume that a significant number of them felt uncomfortable
with the idea of the crucifix being taken down in the National Assembly. I
think the lesson to take from that is not that Quebecers are more Catholic
than they let on, but rather that being attached to one's spiritual symbols
and traditions is an entirely different thing from being overtly and
actively religious.

I'm an atheist, and for a long time I wore a crucifix around my neck (it
belonged to my grandmother). But I haven't been to Mass in years, I don't
eat fish on Fridays, I'm pro-choice and I'm pro-birth-control. So why did I
wear it at all? I don't know for sure, but I will note that sometimes
sentimentality and force of habit trumps all.

## The Road Forward

I never know how to end these things.

If the Charter is passed, it probably won't pass the Supreme Court. It
remains to be seen if the government would then invoke the notwithstanding
clause. It would [not be the first time][10] the Quebec government has had
to use it. It makes me wonder if there's a limit to the number of times a
province can invoke the notwithstanding clause.

In any case, it's all very sad. This is actually a pretty nice place to
live, all things considered. It's a shame that something like this comes
along once in a while to mar it.

I predict that we're headed for a provincial election pretty soon. I think
it's safe to say that I won't be voting PQ.  But most of the other parties
don't look that great either. It's a shame the NDP never got around to
forming a provincial party in Quebec.

If the NDP or Green party is listening, now would be a good time to finally
run some candidates in my riding!


[1]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Diamond_Age
[2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charter_of_Quebec_Values
[3]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Godwin%27s_law
[4]: /2012/06/28/niqabs
[5]: http://itspronouncedmetrosexual.com/2012/11/30-examples-of-male-privilege/
[6]: http://xkcd.com/385/
[7]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/La%C3%AFcit%C3%A9
[8]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maurice_Duplessis
[9]: http://www.ixdaily.com/grind/a9116c1a393ce6661245f6609a81130830e2949e/
[10]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bill_101
