---
date: 2024-11-02T12:12:54-04:00
title: "A Distinct Lack of Barbers"
blurb: "Part two of our trip to Spain; thoughts on Seville and Madrid"
mp-syndicate-to:
- mastodon
tags: 
- travel
- spain
---

I'm 47 years old, and most of the people I work with are much younger than I
am - often in their 20's and 30's.  Cultural references that I think are
universal sometimes turn out to be pretty specific to my age group in ways
that surprise me.

Take something like Bugs Bunny.  Most people, young and old, have of course
*heard* of Bugs Bunny but it turns out that not a lot of young people grew
up watching it.  I have, and it is [because of this cartoon][1] that I
happen vaguely know some of the music to [The Barber of Seville][2].

So when I told some of my workmates that I was visiting Seville, and that I
would be visiting all the popular sites *as well as a barber*, no one got
the joke.  They took one look at my shaved head and with genuine confusion
would proceed to inform me that I have no hair and hence would not need the
services of a barber.

Growing old is *awful*, y'all.

Anyway! After [Barcelona][3], Evelyn and I hopped on a train and headed to
Seville.  We had booked 3 nights.  It's not a destination you often hear
about in connection with a trip to Spain, but I had heard that it was
beautiful, and well worth the visit.

I had *also* heard that it was "underrated" and so I had assumed that it
would be less crowded than Barcelona.  Was I right?  Let's find out!

## Arrival

Our apartment was located across from [Las Setas][4], an odd, mushroom
shaped structure a short walk from the Old Town.  The accommodations were a
cross between an Airbnb and a hotel - it was a full apartment with fridge
and stove, but we didn't have to share the place with anyone.  Nice enough
digs, and a damn sight quieter than Barcelona.

In terms of location, we were about a half hour walk from the Plaza de
Espana, which I was desperate to see right away.  Plaza de Espana is the
"postcard" attraction of Seville - it's what shows up when you search for
"Seville" in a search engine and choose "images".  Try and you'll see what I
mean, and you'll also understand why I wanted to see this thing so bad.

The best way to get to the Plaza de Espana is to go through the Barrio de
Santa Cruz, otherwise known as the Old Town, or Jewish Quater of Seville, a
gorgeously colourful collection of narrow streets, alleyways and squares.
It reminded me a bit of El Born in Barcelona but way less gritty and better
maintained - so well maintained, in fact, that Evelyn thought the whole
thing looked a bit unreal, like a theme park.  I can see where she's coming
from and I don't entirely disagree, but I still found myself enjoying the
neighbourhood's twists and turns, even if I was sharing the experience with
thousands of other tourists.

Santa Cruz is home to some of the most popular tourist attractions in
Seville, like the Cathedral and the Royal Alcazar and though these were
definitely on my list of things to see - I had already bought tickets for
both of them for the following day - at the moment I had my sights set on
the Plaza.  From the directions we were going, we approached it from behind,
turned a corner and...voila.

It's hard to describe what hits your eyes when you turn the corner.
It's\...immense, certainly, enough to catch your breath, but that's not
quite the whole story.  The entire package just sort of catches your eye,
from the square in front of the building, to the colourful, tiled mosaics,
to the symmetrical twin towers on either end, to the little stream running
through it all.  It's just...stunning, in a quite literal way - I was
speechless for a few seconds the first time I saw it.

I was surprised to learn that the Plaza de Espana isn't actually very old;
it was built in 1929 for the Seville World Fair.  It was built to impress,
and accomplishes the goal effortlessly.  I was more disappointed to learn
that the building now houses mostly government offices but I guess you got
to do *something* with all that space.

## Second Day

The next day was reserved for our two main paid attractions in Seville: the
Royal Alcazar and the Seville Cathedral.

First up was the Royal Alcazar, the Spanish royal family's official
residence when they stay in Seville.  It looks like something out of
Morocco.  At first I thought it was actually built by Moorish invaders but,
alas, the truth is a bit more mundane.  Though originally the site of a 10th
century Islamic citadel, progressive conquests and reconstructions have led
to current palace, a Mud√©jar-style estate dating back to the 14th century,
near the end of Islamic rule in Spain.  It *looks* like something
Scheherazade may have cooked up, but it was actually built by European
Christians as a Christian residence, though very much in the style of the
conquering Moors.

The place is mind-blowing.  To some extent, I suppose, it must have been the
novelty of the whole thing - I'd never seen anything quite it.  When you
visit Europe, you're used to seeing a lot of churches and castles and
palaces of a certain ilk, and the Alcazar just doesn't fit the mould.

When the tour was over, we had lunch, walked a bit and then stood in line
for the Seville Cathedral.  Like the Alcazar, the site has Islamic origins
and was originally the site of a large mosque.  Nothing remains of the
original structure except, notably, the Giralda tower, which totally looks
the part.

I usually don't bother with church tours when I visit Europe, but this one
came highly recommended, for reasons I didn't fully grasp until I booked
some time inside.  The Seville Cathedral is the largest Gothic cathedral in
the world and although I understand what that means *abstractly* it's still
a big hit to the brain when you go inside and see just what that means in
practice.

I could say that it's huge, but what does that even mean?  Legend has it
that the architects wanted to build a church so big the world thought they
were crazy.  Mission accomplished - the size is impossible to convey in
words, and difficult in photos.  Let's just say that when you go inside you
feel very, very, very small.  My first reaction was to wonder how on earth
they keep the ceilings clean.

There are, reportedly, over 80 chapels (distinct altars or areas where
people can kneel and pray) inside but, again, I'm not exactly sure what I'm
supposed to do with that information.  How many chapels does a church
usually have?  I have no idea.

What I *do* know is that the main chapel is called, unsurprisingly, the Main
Chapel, and that it houses one of the most breathtaking works of art I've
ever seen in my life: the Ritablo Mayor, or Main Altarpiece, an unassuming
name for something so incredibly *extra*.

The Ritablo Mayor stands roughly 60 feet tall and consists of matrix or grid
of Bible scenes, all carved out of wood and gilded to the hilt.  In a time
when most people couldn't read, this was meant to familiarize them with
selected Bible stories, the way a comic book might today.

Oh! And the Cathedral is also the final resting place of one Christopher
Columbus.  An asshole, to be sure, but the history is deep here.

## Third Day

The third day in Seville was mostly just exploration and if you're going to
do that, one neighbourhood stands out: Triana.  At least, that's what all
the guide books say, which means that it's still just as touristy as the
rest of town.

I'm being a bit unfair.  Triana definitely had a lot of tourists but it also
had a lot of stretches that just seemed...uninteresting.  Therein lies rub
when it comes to the dichotomy between "authentic" and "touristy".
Generally speaking, touristy places are like that for a reason - and, by
contrast, the non-touristy, authentic spots are *also* like that for a
reason.

When we first crossed the bridge to Trina, for example, after a bit of
wandering, we settled on a bar that felt pretty local.  It wasn't a bad
spot, and the food was okay, but...it was definitely not catering to us.  I
think people sometimes don't realize that "real" Spaniards drink local beer
and eat fries and pizza like the rest of us.  I honestly think the place
could have become better over upon multiple visits but we never got the
chance.

It turns out that we actually crossed the wrong bridge.  We meant to cross
the Puente de Isabel II, which was supposed to take us directly into the
main part of the neighbourhood, with all the popular restaurants and bars,
but instead we crossed a bridge or two earlier and ended up in a part of
town that was much more residential and local - as represented by the bar we
settled on.  We didn't quite know where we were, and we couldn't quite
figure out why there wasn't anything interesting around us.  Again, it all
comes back to be authentic versus touristy, and being careful what you wish
for.
